chore: add proposal for privilege changes to log-agent (#2347)
kyma-project/telemetry-manager: docs/contributor/arch/025-minimal-privileges-for-log-agent.md

### Option a
Grant read access to the `/var/log/pods` directory to the log-agent user. This can be done by running the log-agent with the `runAsGroup: 0` security context option in the pod spec.

### Option b
Add additional capabilities to the log-agent pod, which allows it to read the logs without changing the permissions of the `/var/log/pods` directory. This can be done by adding the `CAP_DAC_READ_SEARCH` capability to the log-agent pod. Adding this capcability allows the log-agent to read files and directories, regardless of the permissions set on them.
Addint this capability on the pod spec alone will not be sufficient as those capabilities are only added to the capability boundary set of the process. One way to actually grant those capabilities to the effective set of is to run setcap on the binary during image creation. This can be done by adding the following line to the Dockerfile of the log-agent:

```dockerfile
RUN setcap cap_dac_read_search+ep /usr/local/bin/telemetry-log-agent
```

## Decision

> For the cache directory, we will go with **Option b** and use the `file_storage` extension to create the directory in `/var/lib/telemetry-log-agent/file-log-receiver`. This avoids the need for an init container and simplifies the deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the cache directory, we will go with **Option b** and use the `file_storage` extension to create the directory in `/var/tmp/telemetry-log-agent/file-log-receiver`. This avoids the need for an init container and simplifies the deployment.
```

Reviewer: For me it is just confusing to not use the same naming, so I suggest to change it

## Current Situation

The log-agent currently runs with elevated privileges, which allows it to access all pod logs in the cluster. This is not ideal from a security perspective.
The elevated privileges are necessary to ensure that the log-agent can:

1. Maintain a file cache which is persistent across restarts, allowing it to resume reading logs from where it left off.
2. Read logs from all pods, including those that are not in the same namespace as the log-agent.

## Possible Solutions

### Cache Directory Permissions
The log-agent needs to be able to write to a filesystem location that is accessible to it. As our log-agent runs as a daemonset, it has access to the host filesystem. 

### Option a
The log-agent can uses a directory in `/var/lib/` for its file cache, which is NOT writeable by the daemonset user by default. Granting write access to this directory can be done using an init container, that runs chmod on the directory before the log-agent starts. To allow changing the premissions the init container needs to run with elevated privileges, which is acceptable as it only runs once during the pod startup.

### Option b

> Another option it to store those cache entries in a subdirectory of `/var/tmp/` which is writable by the daemonset user by default. This would not require an init container. To circumvent the issue of the log-agent not being able to write to the folder the directory cannot be created by the kubelet at startup, but must be created by the log-agent itself. This can be done using the `create_directory` option of the `file_storage` extension.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatively, we can store those cache entries in a subdirectory of `/var/tmp/`, which by default is writable by the DaemonSet user. This would not require an init container. To circumvent the issue that the log agent cannot write to the folder, the directory must be created by the log agent itself (instead of by the kubelet at startup). For this, we can use the `create_directory` option of the `file_storage` extension.
```

> telemetry-log-agent change:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Telemetry log agent change:
```

```yaml
...
    extensions:
        file_storage:
            create_directory: true
            directory: /var/lib/telemetry-log-agent/file-log-receiver
...
```

### Log Reading Permissions

> The log-agent needs to read logs from all pods in the cluster. Those logs are stored in the `/var/log/pods` on the node filesystem. The log-agent needs to have read access to this directory. The default permissions of this directory allow only acces to the root user and root group. To allow the log-agent to read the logs, we can either:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The log agent needs to read logs from all Pods in the cluster. Those logs are stored in the `/var/log/pods` on the Node filesystem. The log agent needs read access to this directory. The default permissions of this directory allow access only to the root user and root group. To allow the log agent to read the logs, we have the following options:
```

### Option a

> Grant read access to the `/var/log/pods` directory to the log-agent user. This can be done by running the log-agent with the `runAsGroup: 0` security context option in the pod spec.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Grant read access to the `/var/log/pods` directory to the log agent user. This can be done by running the log agent with the `runAsGroup: 0` security context option in the Pod spec.
```

### Option b

> Add additional capabilities to the log-agent pod, which allows it to read the logs without changing the permissions of the `/var/log/pods` directory. This can be done by adding the `CAP_DAC_READ_SEARCH` capability to the log-agent pod. Adding this capcability allows the log-agent to read files and directories, regardless of the permissions set on them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add additional capabilities to the log agent Pod, so that it can read the logs without changing the permissions of the `/var/log/pods` directory. This can be done by adding the `CAP_DAC_READ_SEARCH` capability to the log agent Pod. With this capability, the log agent can read files and directories, regardless of the permissions set on them.
```

Addint this capability on the pod spec alone will not be sufficient as those capabilities are only added to the capability boundary set of the process. One way to actually grant those capabilities to the effective set of is to run setcap on the binary during image creation. This can be done by adding the following line to the Dockerfile of the log-agent:

```dockerfile
RUN setcap cap_dac_read_search+ep /usr/local/bin/telemetry-log-agent
```

## Decision

For the cache directory, we will go with **Option b** and use the `file_storage` extension to create the directory in `/var/lib/telemetry-log-agent/file-log-receiver`. This avoids the need for an init container and simplifies the deployment.

> For the log reading permissions we will go with **Option a** and run the log-agent with `runAsGroup: 0` security context option. This allows the log-agent to read the logs without changing the permissions of the `/var/log/pods` directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the log reading permissions, we choose **Option a** and run the log agent with security context option `runAsGroup: 0`. This allows the log agent to read the logs without changing the permissions of the `/var/log/pods` directory.
```

> The final log-agent configuration will look like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The final log agent configuration will look like this:
```

```yaml
    spec:
    ...
        securityContext:
          allowPrivilegeEscalation: false
          capabilities:
            drop:
            - ALL
          privileged: false
          readOnlyRootFilesystem: true
          runAsGroup: 0
          runAsNonRoot: true
          runAsUser: 1000
          seccompProfile:
            type: RuntimeDefault
    ...
        volumeMounts:

>         - mountPath: /var/lib/telemetry-log-agent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - mountPath: /var/tmp/telemetry-log-agent
```
